Hello friends
In this video let us learn how to perform binary
search using divide and conquer algorithm
So we have already learned binary search using the normal
method
If you're unfamiliar with the binary search concept you can
watch the binary search video under the searching algorithms section
In this video let us learn how to solve the
binary search with a divide and conquer algorithms
So in the normal approach whenever the middle element is
not matching we will change the start and end index
accordingly
In this approach If the middle element is not matching we
will divide the respective subarray and continue the same
process
Using recursion Let us see how
Let us take a sorted array of eight elements
10, 23 ,45, 70, 80, 100, 111, 123 and indecent start from
0 to 7
So start is equal to zero and end is equal
to seven and remember the array should be sorted
inorder to apply
The binary search algorithm  let us assume the key to be
found is 45
So what will binary search algorithm do It will
calculate the middle index and if the middle index matches
the key
The search is found otherwise
It will skip on the sub array and do the
same process until it finds the element here
The start indexes  zero and end  indexes seven
So middle index will be zero plus seven divided by
two which is three so check
If index three has the value 45 and it is
not index three has the value 70
And since the array and sorted order the key
45 should be present before index three so the divide
and conquer algorithm  will divide the subarray from
index 0 to 2 and do the same process here mid
is equal to zero plus two divided by two which
is one
So the middle indexes equal to one so check
if it has the value
45 but it has the value 23 and since 45
is greater than 23
If 45 is present in the array it should be
present in the right subarray only that is after
23 so the divide and conquer algorithm will divide the
subarray
Were the starting and ending is too now the mid
indexes equel to two plus two divided by two
which is two and index two has the value 45
which means our search is formed
So let us see the code for binary search function and
explain it using the same case
So here we have the binary search function and we
will pause the array start of the array  end of the array and
the key to be searched into the function
So here this is the array it start is equal
to zero and is equal to seven and the key
to be searched is 45
So we have to find the middle element check
If it is the key else find were the key
can be present and divide the and search in one
subarray only
So we have to do this process till we find
the key
We get an invalid index
So put the code inside this if start less than
or equal to end and find mid first that is
start plus end by two that is seven by two
which is equal to three
So check if  elemended index is the key 45
and it is not so check
If this middle element is less than the key and
it is not so 45 can only be present in
the left part
So we have returned binary search of array start
zero mid minus one that is two and key 45
so from binary search function
We are calling binary search with the same array started
zero and end as two let us say this is
binary search one at whatever this function binary search one
is returning
That value will be returned by this main binary search
also So let us see what happened  here start is less
than end So find mid and it will be two
by two equal to one check If elemented
index one is the key and it is not so
check If this middle element is less than key and it
is so 45 can only be present in the right
part of this subarray  so we are calling
binary search a again
So we have binary search of arr  start us mid plus
one which is two an end us two and key
45 So let us  call this as binary search two
So we had main binary search calling binary search one
and binary search one is calling binary search two
So let us
See what happens in binary search two here start is
equal to end
So find mid which is two plus two divided by
two equal to two
So check if element at middle index to is the
key and it is so returned one
As the search is found
So binary search two is returning 12 binary search one
and binary search one is returning one to this main
binary search function and finally this function will return the
result one to main function
So this is how we implement binary search using divide
and conquer approach
So what where the  three steps in the divide conquer
approach divide conquer and combine here Splitting the subarray
is equal to dividing the problem
Finding the middle index and checking whether it has the
key or solution is conquering the problem and returning search
formed status that is a result from various recursive
calls is known as combining
So this is a perfect example of the divide and
conquer algorithm
This is how the divide and conquer algorithm recursively
divide the original array and search the given key
And finally, the result is gathered from those recursive calls